Managing dependencies update (#266)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/managing-dependencies.md

heroImagePath: "https://assets.astronomer.io/website/img/guides/dependencies.png"
tags: ["Best Practices", "Dependencies", "Basics"]
---

## Overview

> Dependencies are one of Airflow's most powerful and popular features - they define the [relationships between tasks](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/tasks.html#relationships).  Dependencies allow you to define flexible pipelines in Airflow that follow data engineering best practices by keeping your tasks atomic. 

Author: Yup, re-wrote to put dependencies in terms of their role in the "graph". Let me know what you think.

In this guide we'll cover the many ways you can implement dependencies in Airflow, including:

- Basic task dependencies
- Dynamic dependencies
- Dependencies with Task Groups
- Dependencies with the TaskFlow API
- Trigger rules

> 

Reviewer: Do we need to redefine "upstream" and "downstream" for this doc? I remember us doing that for more general topics, and it seems particularly relevant for this topic.

Author: Yeah good call, added some language to the intro similar to what we have in other guides.

## Basic Dependencies

Basic dependencies between Airflow tasks can be set in two ways:

- Using bitshift operators `<<` and `>>`
- Using the `set_upstream` and `set_downstream` methods

For example, if we have a DAG with four sequential tasks, the dependencies can be set in four ways:

- Using `set_downstream()`

    ```python
    t0.set_downstream(t1)
    t1.set_downstream(t2)
    t2.set_downstream(t3)
    ```

- Using `set_upstream()`

    ```python
    t3.set_upstream(t2)
    t2.set_upstream(t1)
    t1.set_upstream(t0)
    ```

- Using `>>`

    ```python
    t0 >> t1 >> t2 >> t3
    ```

- Using `<<`

    ```python
    t3 << t2 << t1 << t0
    ```

All of these methods are equivalent, and result in the following DAG. 

![Basic Dependencies](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/managing-dependencies/basic_dependencies.png)

Which method you choose is a matter of personal preference. Best practice is to use one method consistently (i.e. don't mix bitshift operators and `set_upstream`/`set_downstream`).

You can also use lists or tuples to set parallel dependencies. For example: 

> - ```python

Reviewer: Bumping this

    t0 >> t1 >> (t2, t3)
    ```

- ```python
    t0 >> t1 >> [t2, t3]
    ```

Both of these are equivalent, and set `t2` and `t3` downstream of `t1`. 

![List Dependencies](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/managing-dependencies/list_dependencies.png)

> Note that you cannot set dependencies between two lists (e.g. `[t0, t1] >> [t2, t3]` will throw an error). If you need to set parallel cross-dependencies in this manner, you can use Airflow's [`chain` function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/models/baseoperator.py#L1650). To use the `chain` function, you can do something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if we want to set multiple parallel cross-dependencies? Unfortunately, Airflow can't parse dependencies between two lists (e.g. `[t0, t1] >> [t2, t3]` throws an error). If you need to set dependencies in this manner, you can use Airflow's [`chain` function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/models/baseoperator.py#L1650):
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.dummy_operator import DummyOperator
from airflow.models.baseoperator import chain

with DAG('dependencies',
         ) as dag:

    t0 = DummyOperator(task_id='t0')
    t1 = DummyOperator(task_id='t1')
    t2 = DummyOperator(task_id='t2')
    t3 = DummyOperator(task_id='t3')
    t4 = DummyOperator(task_id='t4')
    t5 = DummyOperator(task_id='t5')
    t6 = DummyOperator(task_id='t6')

    chain(t0, t1, [t2, t3], [t4, t5], t6)
```

> Which results in the following DAG:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code results in the following DAG:
```

![Chain Dependencies](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/managing-dependencies/chain.png)

> Note that with the `chain` function any lists or tuples included must be the same length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that with the `chain` function, any lists or tuples included must be of the same length.
```

## Dynamic Dependencies

> If you generate tasks dynamically in your DAG, you should also set dependencies dynamically to ensure they reflect any changes in the tasks. This is easy to accomplish: simply define the dependencies within the context of the code used to dynamically create the tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you [generate tasks dynamically](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dynamically-generating-dags) in your DAG, you should also set dependencies dynamically to ensure that they reflect any changes in the tasks. This is easy to accomplish: simply define the dependencies within the context of the code used to dynamically create the tasks.
```

Appropriate to link out here?

Author: Eh, not really. That guide is about generating _DAGs_ dynamically, but the comment here is about generating _tasks_ dynamically within a DAG, which are somewhat different concepts.

> For example, below we generate a set of parallel dynamic tasks by looping through a list of endpoints. We define the dependencies within the loop, which means every `generate_file` task will be downstream of `start` and upstream of `send_email`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, below we generate a set of parallel dynamic tasks by looping through a list of endpoints. We define the dependencies within the loop, which means every `generate_file` task is downstream of `start` and upstream of `send_email`.
```

```python
with DAG('covid_data_to_s3') as dag:

    t0 = DummyOperator(task_id='start')

    send_email = EmailOperator(
        task_id='send_email',
        to=email_to,
        subject='Covid to S3 DAG',
        html_content='<p>The Covid to S3 DAG completed successfully. Files can now be found on S3. <p>'
    )
    
    for endpoint in endpoints:
        generate_files = PythonOperator(
            task_id='generate_file_{0}'.format(endpoint),
            python_callable=upload_to_s3,
            op_kwargs={'endpoint': endpoint, 'date': date}
        )
        
        t0 >> generate_files >> send_email
```

The resulting DAG looks like this:

![Dynamic Dependencies](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/managing-dependencies/dynamic_tasks.png)

## Dependencies with Task Groups

> [Task groups](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/dags.html#taskgroups) are a UI grouping concept available in Airflow 2+ that can visually group tasks in the Airflow UI. For more on task groups in general, including how to create them and when to use them, check out our [task groups guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/task-groups).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Task groups](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/dags.html#taskgroups) are a UI-based grouping concept available in Airflow 2.0+. For more information on task groups in general, including how to create them and when to use them, check out our [task groups guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/task-groups).
```

> When working with task groups, it is important to note that dependencies can be set both inside and outside the group. For example, in the DAG code below we have a start task, a task group with two dependent tasks, and an end task that need to happen sequentially. The dependencies between the two tasks in the task group are set within the task group's context (`t1 >> t2`). The dependencies between the task group and the start/end tasks are set within the DAG's context (`t0 >> tg1 >> t3`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with task groups, it is important to note that dependencies can be set both inside and outside of the group. For example, in the DAG code below we have a start task, a task group with two dependent tasks, and an end task that need to happen sequentially. The dependencies between the two tasks in the task group are set within the task group's context (`t1 >> t2`). The dependencies between the task group and the start/end tasks are set within the DAG's context (`t0 >> tg1 >> t3`).
```

```python
t0 = DummyOperator(task_id='start')

# Start Task Group definition
with TaskGroup(group_id='group1') as tg1:
    t1 = DummyOperator(task_id='task1')
    t2 = DummyOperator(task_id='task2')

    t1 >> t2
# End Task Group definition
    
t3 = DummyOperator(task_id='end')

# Set Task Group's (tg1) dependencies
t0 >> tg1 >> t3
```

> This code results in a DAG that looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code results in the following DAG:
```

![Task Group Dependencies](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/managing-dependencies/task_group.png)

> For more examples of setting dependencies within different types of task groups, check out the guide linked above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Would either link above or here, but not both.

Author: It is only linked "above"? Or do you mean not reference it twice?

Reviewer: I would remove this sentence and just keep the previous reference, because the original reference implies what's stated here (that you can find examples of using task groups in the guide)

## Dependencies with the TaskFlow API

> The [TaskFlow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/taskflow.html), available in Airflow 2+, provides an easy way to turn Python functions into Airflow tasks using the `@task` decorator. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [TaskFlow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/taskflow.html), available in Airflow 2.0+, provides an easy way to turn Python functions into Airflow tasks using the `@task` decorator. 
```

> If your DAG has only Python functions that are all defined with the decorator, setting dependencies is as easy as invoking the Python functions. For example, in the DAG below we have two dependent tasks, `get_testing_increases` and `analyze_testing_increases`. To set the dependencies, we invoke the functions: `analyze_testing_increases(get_testing_increase(state))`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your DAG has only Python functions that are all defined with the decorator, setting dependencies is as easy as invoking the Python functions. For example, in the DAG below we have two dependent tasks, `get_testing_increases` and `analyze_testing_increases`. To set the dependencies, we invoke the function `analyze_testing_increases(get_testing_increase(state))`:
```

```python
with DAG('sagemaker_model',
         ) as dag:

    @task
    def upload_data_to_s3(s3_bucket, test_s3_key):
        """
        Uploads validation data to S3 from /include/data 
        """
        s3_hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id='aws-sagemaker')

        # Take string, upload to S3 using predefined method
        s3_hook.load_file(filename='include/data/test.csv', 
                        key=test_s3_key, 
                        bucket_name=s3_bucket, 
                        replace=True)

    upload_data = upload_data_to_s3(s3_bucket, test_s3_key)

    predict = SageMakerTransformOperator(
        task_id='predict',
        config=transform_config,
        aws_conn_id='aws-sagemaker'
    )

    results_to_redshift = S3ToRedshiftOperator(
            task_id='save_results',
            aws_conn_id='aws-sagemaker',
            s3_bucket=s3_bucket,
            s3_key=output_s3_key,
            schema="PUBLIC",
            table="results",
            copy_options=['csv'],
        )

    upload_data >> predict >> results_to_redshift
```

## Trigger Rules

> In Airflow, when you set dependencies between tasks the default behavior is for a task to be run only when all upstream tasks have succeeded. However, you have many other options for when a task gets run that you can control using [trigger rules](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/dags.html#concepts-trigger-rules).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you set dependencies between tasks, Airflow's default behavior is to run a task only when all upstream tasks have succeeded. However, you can change this default behavior using [trigger rules](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/dags.html#concepts-trigger-rules).
```

The options available are:

> - **all_success:** (default) all upstream tasks have succeeded
> - **all_failed:** all upstream tasks are in a failed or upstream\_failed state
> - **all_done:** all upstream tasks are done with their execution
> - **one_failed:** runs as soon as at least one upstream task has failed, it does not wait for all upstream tasks to be completed
> - **one_success:** runs as soon as at least one upstream task has succeeded, it does not wait for all upstream tasks to be completed
> - **dummy:** dependencies are just for show, trigger at will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **all_success:** (default) The task runs only when all upstream tasks have succeeded.
- **all_failed:** The task runs only when all upstream tasks are in a failed or upstream\_failed state.
- **all_done:** The task runs once all upstream tasks are done with their execution.
- **one_failed:** The task runs as soon as at least one upstream task has failed. 
- **one_success:** The task runs as soon as at least one upstream task has succeeded.
- **dummy:** Dependencies are just for show, trigger at will.
```

### Branching and Trigger Rules

> One common scenario where you might need to implement trigger rules is if your DAG contains conditional logic like branching. In these cases `one_success` might be a more appropriate rule for tasks directly downstream of branches than the default `all_success`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One common scenario where you might need to implement trigger rules is if your DAG contains conditional logic like branching. In these cases, `one_success` might be a more appropriate rule than `all_success`.
```

Reviewer: Bumping

```python
import random
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.dummy import DummyOperator
from airflow.operators.python import BranchPythonOperator
from datetime import datetime
from airflow.utils.trigger_rule import TriggerRule

def return_branch(**kwargs):
    branches = ['branch_0', 'branch_1', 'branch_2']
    return random.choice(branches)

with DAG(dag_id='branch',
         start_date=datetime(2021, 1, 1),
         max_active_runs=1,
         schedule_interval=None,
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

    #DummyOperators
    start = DummyOperator(task_id='start')
    end = DummyOperator(
        task_id='end',
        trigger_rule=TriggerRule.ONE_SUCCESS
    )

    branching = BranchPythonOperator(
        task_id='branching',
        python_callable=return_branch,
        provide_context=True
    )

    start >> branching

    for i in range(0, 3):
        d = DummyOperator(task_id='branch_{0}'.format(i))
        branching >> d >> end
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This code results in the following DAG:

```

heroImagePath: "https://assets.astronomer.io/website/img/guides/dependencies.png"
tags: ["Best Practices", "Dependencies", "Basics"]
---

## Overview

> [Dependencies]((https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/tasks.html#relationships)) are one of Airflow's most powerful and popular features. Remember that in Airflow your pipelines are defined as Directed, Acyclic Graphs (DAGs). Each task is a node in that graph, and dependencies make up the edges that determine the conditions that must be met before tasks get run. Dependencies allow you to define flexible pipelines in Airflow that follow data engineering best practices by keeping your tasks atomic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Dependencies]((https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/tasks.html#relationships)) are one of Airflow's most powerful and popular features. In Airflow, your pipelines are defined as Directed, Acyclic Graphs (DAGs). If each task is a node in that graph, then dependencies are the directed edges that determine how you can move through the graph. Because of this, dependencies are key to following data engineering best practices because they help you define flexible pipelines with atomic tasks.
```

Reviewer: I rewrote the explanation to start mathematic, then move towards Airflow/ data engineering implications.
